The Seine River is not the longest river of
France but it is certainly the most iconic,
with its banks passing some of the
world’s most recognizable architecture.
The river has its humble beginning
in the heart of the Burgundy region,
where an artificial grotto and decorative statues
attend the start of its 777 kilometer long
journey through the tranquil French countryside.
Flowing northwards, progressively larger streams
contribute to the Seine as it makes its way down
from the Langres plateau. During this first half,
the river rapidly loses elevation and by the time the
waters reach Paris, the banks are only 24 meters
above sea level, with more than 440 kilometers
still to go before reaching the English Channel.
As a consequence of this shallow gradient,
the river's current is exceptionally slow.
In combination with a change in geology where
soft chalky plains are replacing the hard
limestone escarpment, the river starts
heavily meandering through the Normandy.
The reduced current also heavily impacts the
river's geometry, with a low erosive force
resulting in a quite shallow river basin. This has
long posed a challenge for larger vessels to reach
Paris, and today, most ocean-going vessels
are limited to the port of Rouen. However,
the port's viability depends entirely
on continuous dredging operations to
maintain a navigable channel to the Pont de
Normandie, one of the longest cable-stayed
bridges of Europe, which marks the gateway
to the English Channel and the Atlantic Ocean.
This shallow gradient and slow flow which
shapes many aspects of the Middle and Lower
Seine also has the unfortunate side
effect of retaining pollutants far
longer than in faster-flowing rivers.
In historic Paris, before the advent
of the industrial revolution, this
issue was still manageable and the
Seine is often depicted as a place for
fishing and bathing in Impressionist art.
With the rise of factories around the river
banks, however, the Seine’s self-cleaning
capabilities were quickly strained. A foul smell
and sluggish black river water eventually gave
the Seine the nickname of “the open sewer”
from the beginning of the 20th century.
Instead of stopping the pollution, Parisians
rather opted to ban swimming in 1923 and kept
dumping more and more waste into the river, with
nitrate fertilizer runoff making the 1960s the
most toxic decade yet. During this time, the
river has almost been declared dead and devoid
of marine life with a mere three species left
that were able to survive in the polluted water.
While attempts have been made to revitalize
the river from the end of the 20th century,
it wasn’t until the preparations for the
Olympic games in 2024 that any significant
successes could be documented. Finally,
in July 2025, 102 years after the initial ban,
significant progress in pollution control
allowed the swimming ban to be lifted,
though monitoring and temporary bans
will continue for the foreseeable future.
If you want to learn about theactual
largest river within French territory,
you can check out this video about the
Rhine river on the border with Germany,
or watch what youtube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one, cheers.